---
_hide_content: true
layout: default
image: "/android-chrome-256x256.png"
title: Nei-Yeh Translation by Harold D. Roth
---

<div style='margin: 20px;'>

<h2 style='font-family:"SingleSleeve";font-size:48pt;text-align:center;'>Nei-Yeh</h2>
<h3>Translation by <a href="https://vivo.brown.edu/display/hroth">Harold D. Roth</a></h3>
<h4>If you enjoyed this translation, consider purchasing <a href="https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1630616.Original_Tao">the original published work</a> which includes excellent commentary.</h4>

<h2>I</h2>
<p>The vital essence of all things:</p>
<p>It is this that brings them to life.</p>
<p>It generates the five grains below</p>
<p>And becomes the constellations above.</p>
<p>When flowing amid the heavens and the earth</p>
<p>We call it ghostly and numinous.</p>
<p>When stored within the chests of human beings,</p>
<p>We call them sages.</p>

<h2>II</h2>
<p>Therefore the vital energy is:</p>
<p>Bright! - as if ascending the heavens;</p>
<p>Dark! - as if entering an abyss;</p>
<p>Vast! - as if dwelling in an ocean;</p>
<p>Lofty! - as if dwelling on a mountain peak.</p>
<br />
<p>Therefore this vital energy</p>
<p>Cannot be halted by force,</p>
<p>Yet can be secured by inner power <em>[Te]</em>.</p>
<p>Cannot be summoned by speech,</p>
<p>Yet can be welcomed by the awareness.</p>
<p>Reverently hold onto it and do not lose it:</p>
<p>This is called "developing inner power."</p>
<p>When inner power develops and wisdom emerges,</p>
<p>The myriad things will, to the last one, be grasped.</p>

<h2>III</h2>  
<p>All the forms of the mind</p>
<p>Are naturally infused and filled with it [the vital essence],</p>
<p>Are naturally generated and developed [because of] it.</p>
<p>It is lost</p>
<p>Inevitably because of sorrow, happiness, joy, anger, desrie, and profit-seeking.</p>
<p>If you are able to cast off sorrow, happiness, joy, anger, desrie, and profit-seeking,</p>
<p>Your mind will just revert to equanimity.</p>
<p>The true condition of the mind</p>
<p>Is that it finds calmness beneficial and, by it, attains repose.</p>
<p>Do not disturb it, do not disrupt it</p>
<p>And harmony will naturally develop.</p>

<h2>IV</h2>
<p>Clear! as though right by your side.</p>
<p>Vague! as though it will not be attained.</p>
<p>Indiscernable! as though beyond the limitless.</p>
<p>The test of this is not far off:</p>
<p>Daily we make use of its inner power.</p>
<p>The Way is what infuses the body,</p>
<p>Yet people are unable to fix it in place.</p>
<p>It goes forth but does not return,</p>
<p>It comes back but does not stay.</p>
<p>Silent! none can hear its sound.</p>
<p>Suddenly stopping! it abides within the mind.</p>
<p>Obscure! we do not see its form.</p>
<p>Surging forth! it arises with us.</p>
<p>We do not see it form,</p>
<p>We do not hear its sound,</p>
<p>Yet we can perceive an order to its accomplishments.</p>
<p>We call it "the Way."</p>
  
<h2>V</h2>
<p>The Way has no fixed position;</p>
<p>It abides within the excellent mind.</p>
<p>When the mind is tranquil and the vital breath is regular,</p>
<p>The Way can thereby be halted.</p>
<p>That Way is not distant from us;</p>
<p>When people attain it they are sustained</p>
<p>That Way is not separated from us;</p>
<p>When people accord with it they are harmonious.</p>
<br />
<p>Therefore: Concentrated! as though you could be roped together with it.</p>
<p>Indiscernable! as though beyond all locations.</p>
<p>The true state of that Way:</p>
<p>How could it be conceived of and pronounced upon?</p>
<p>Cultivate you mind, make your thoughts tranquil,</p>
<p>And the Way can thereby be attained.</p>

<h2>VI</h2>
<p>As for the Way:</p>
<p>It is what the mouth cannot speak of,</p>
<p>They eyes cannot see,</p>
<p>And the ears cannot hear.</p>
<p>It is that with which we cultivate the mind and align the body.</p>
<p>When people lose it they die;</p>
<p>When people gain it they flourish.</p>
<p>When endeavors lose it they fail;</p>
<p>When they gain it they succeed.</p>
<p>The Way never has a root or trunk,</p>
<p>It never has leaves or flowers.</p>
<p>The myriad things are generated by it;</p>
<p>The myriad things are completed by it.</p>
<p>We designate it "the Way."</p>

<h2>VII</h2>
<p>For the heavens, the ruling principle  is to be aligned.</p>
<p>For the earth, the ruling principle is to be level.</p>
<p>For the human beings, the ruling principle is to be tranquil.</p>
<p>Spring, autum, winter, and summer are the seasons of the heavens.</p>
<p>Mountains, hills, rivers, and valleys are the resources of the earth.</p>
<p>Pleasure and anger, accepting and rejecting are the devices of human beings.</p>
<p>Therefore, the Sage:</p>
<p>Alters with the seasons but doesn't transform,</p>
<p>Shifts with things but doesn't change places with them.</p>

<h2>VIII</h2>
<p>If you can be aligned and be tranquil,</p>
<p>Only then can you be stable.</p>
<p>With a stable mind at your core,</p>
<p>With the eyes and ears acute and clear,</p>
<p>And with the four limbs firm and fixed,</p>
<p>You can thereby make a lodging place for the vital essence.</p>
<p>The vital essence: it is the essence of the vital energy.</p>
<p>When the vital energy is guided, it [the vital essence] is generated,</p>
<p>But when it is generated, there is thought,</p>
<p>When there is thought, there is knowledge,</p>
<p>But when there is knowledge, the you must stop.</p>
<p>Whenever the forms of the mind have excessive knowledge,</p>
<p>You lose your vitality.</p>

<h2>IX</h2>
<p>Those who can trasnform even a single thing, call them "numinous";</p>
<p>Those who can alter even a single situation, call them "wise."</p>
<p>But to transform without expending vital energy; to alter without expending wisdom:</p>
<p>Only exemplary persons who hold fastto the One are able to do this.</p>
<p>Hold fast to the One; do not lost it,</p>
<p>And you will be able to master the myriad things.</p>
<p>Exemplary persons act upon things,</p>
<p>And are not acted upon by them,</p>
<p>Because they grasp the guiding principle of the One.</p>

<h2>X</h2>
<p>With a well-ordered mind within you,</p>
<p>Well-ordered words issue forth from your mouth,</p>
<p>And well-ordered tasks are imposed upon others.</p>
<p>Then all under the heavens will be well ordered.</p>
<br />
<p>"When one word is grasped,</p>
<p>All under the heavens will submit.</p>
<p>When one word is fixed,</p>
<p>All under the heavens will listen."</p>
<br />
<p>It is this [word "Way"] to which the saying refers.</p>

<h2>XI</h2>
<p>When your body is not aligned,</p>
<p>The inner power will not come.</p>
<p>When you are not tranquil within,</p>
<p>Your mind will not be well ordered.</p>
<p>Align your body, assist the inner power,</p>
<p>Then it will gradually com on its own.</p>

<h2>XII</h2>
<p>The numinous [mind]: no one knows its limit;</p>
<p>It intuitively knows the myriad things.</p>
<p>Hold it within you, do not let it waver.</p>
<p>To not disrupt your senses with external things,</p>
<p>To not disrupt your mind with your sense:</p>
<p>This is called "grasping it wihtin you."</p>

<h2>XIII</h2>
<p>There is numinous [mind] naturally residing within;</p>
<p>One moment it goes, the next it comes,</p>
<p>And no one is able to conceive of it.</p>
<p>If you lost it you are inevitable disordered;</p>
<p>If you attain it you are inevitable well ordered.</p>
<p>Diligently clean out its lodging place</p>
<p>And its vital essence will naturally arrive.</p>
<p>Still your attempts to imagine and conceive of it.</p>
<p>Relax your efforts to reflect on and control it.</p>
<p>Be reverent and and diligent</p>
<p>And its vital essence will naturally stabilize.</p>
<p>Grasp it and don't let go.</p>
<p>The the eyes and ears won't overflow</p>
<p>And the mind will have nothing else to seek.</p>
<p>When a properly aligned mind resides within you,</p>
<p>The myriad things will be seen in their proper perspective.</p>

<h2>XIV</h2>
<p>The Way fills the entire world.</p>
<p>It is everywhere that people are,</p>
<p>But people are unable to understand this.</p>
<p>When you are released by this one word:</p>
<p>You reach up to the heavens above;</p>
<p>You stretch down to the earth below;</p>
<p>You pervadethe nine inhabited regions.</p>
<p>What does it mean to be released by it?</p>
<p>The answer resides in the calmness of the mind.</p>
<p>When your mind is clam, your senses are calmed.</p>
<p>What makes them well ordered is the mind.</p>
<p>By means of thhe mind you store the mind:</p>
<p>Within the mind there is yet another mind.</p>
<p>That mind within the mind: it is an awareness that precedes words.</p>
<p>Only after there is awareness does it take shape;</p>
<p>Only after it takes shape is there a word.</p>
<p>Only after there is a word is it implemented;</p>
<p>Only after it is implemented is there order.</p>
<p>Without order, you will always be chaotic.</p>
<p>If chaotic, you die.</p>

<h2>XV</h2>
<p>For those who preserve and naturally generate wital essence</p>
<p>On the outside a clamness will flourish.</p>
<p>Stored inside, we take it to be the well spring.</p>
<p>Floodlike, it harmonizes and equalizes</p>
<p>And we take it to be the fount of the vital energy.</p>
<p>When the fount is not dried up,</p>
<p>The four limbs are firm.</p>
<p>When the spring is not drained,</p>
<p>Vital evergy freely circulates through the nine apertures.</p>
<p>You can then exhaust the heavens and the earth</p>
<p>And spread over the four seas.</p>
<p>When you have no delusions within you,</p>
<p>Externally there will be no disasters.</p>
<p>Those who keep their minds unimpaired within,</p>
<p>Externally keep their bodies unimpaired,</p>
<p>Who do not encounter heavenly disasters</p>
<p>Or meet with harm at the hands of others,</p>
<p>Call them Sages.</p>

<h2>XVI</h2>
<p>If people can be aligned and tranquil,</p>
<p>Their skin will be ample and smooth,</p>
<p>Their ears and eyes will be acute and clear,</p>
<p>Their muscles will be supple and their bones will be strong.</p>
<p>They will then be able to hold up the Great Circle [of the heavens]</p>
<p>And tread firmly over the Great Square [of the earth].</p>
<p>They will mirror things with great purity.</p>
<p>And will perceive things with great clarity.</p>
<p>Reverently be aware [of the Way] and do not waver,</p>
<p>And you will daily renew your inner power,</p>
<p>Thoroughly understand all under the heavens,</p>
<p>And exhasut everything within the Four Directions.</p>
<p>To reverently bring forth the effulgence [of the Way]:</p>
<p>This is called "inwared attainment."</p>
<p>If you do this but fail to return to it,</p>
<p>This will cause a wavering in your vitality.</p>

<h2>XVII</h2>
<p>For all [to practice] this Way;</p>
<p>You must coil, you must contract,</p>
<p>You must unciol, you must expand,</p>
<p>You must be firm, you must be regular [in this practice]</p>
<p>Hold fast to this excellent [practice]; do not let go of it.</p>
<p>Chase away the excessive; abandon the trivial.</p>
<p>And when you reach its ultimate limit</p>
<p>You will return to the Way and its inner power.</p>

<h2>XVIII</h2>
<p>When there is a mind that is unimpaired within you,</p>
<p>It cannot be hidden.</p>
<p>It will be known in your countenance,</p>
<p>And seen in your skin color.</p>
<p>If with this good flow of vital energy you encounter others,</p>
<p>They will be kinder to you than your own brethren.</p>
<p>But if with a bad flow of vital energy you encounter others,</p>
<p>They will harm you with their weapons.</p>
<p>[This is because] the wordles pronouncement</p>
<p>Is more rapid than the drumming of thunder.</p>
<p>The perceptible form of the mind's vital energy</p>
<p>Is brighter than the sun and moon,</p>
<p>And more apparent than the concern of parents.</p>
<p>Rewards are not sufficient to encourage the good;</p>
<p>Punishments are not sufficient to discourage the bad.</p>
<p>Yet once this flow of vital energy is achieved,</p>
<p>All under the heavens will submit.</p>
<p>And once the mind is made stable,</p>
<p>All under the heavens will listen.</p>

<h2>XIX</h2>
<p>By concentrating your vital breath as if numinous,</p>
<p>The myriad things will all be contained within you.</p>
<p>Can you concentrate? Can you unite with them?</p>
<p>Can you not resort to divining by tortoise or milfoil</p>
<p>Yet know bad and good fortune?</p>
<p>Can you stop? Can you cease?</p>
<p>Can you not seek it in others,</p>
<p>Yet attain it within yourself?</p>
<p>You think and think about it,</p>
<p>And think still further about it.</p>
<p>You think, yet still cannot penetrate it.</p>
<p>While the ghostly and numinous will penetrate it,</p>
<p>It is not due to the power of the ghostly and numinous,</p>
<p>But to the utmost refinement of your essential vital breath.</p>
<p>When the four limbs are aligned</p>
<p>And the blood and vital breath are tranquil,</p>
<p>Unify your awareness, concentrate your mind,</p>
<p>Then your eyes and ears will not be overstimulated.</p>
<p>And even the far-off will seem close at hand.</p>

<h2>XX</h2>
<p>Deep thinking generates knowledge.</p>
<p>Idleness and carelessness generate worry.</p>
<p>Cruelty and arrogance generate resentment.</p>
<p>Worry and grief generate illness.</p>
<p>When illness reaches a distressing degree, you die.</p>
<p>When you think about something and don't let fo of it,</p>
<p>Internally you will be distressed, externally you will be weak.</p>
<p>Do not plan things out in advance</p>
<p>Or else your vitality will cede its dwelling.</p>
<br />
<p>In eating, it is beset not to fill up;</p>
<p>In thinking, it is best no to overdo.</p>
<p>Limit these to the appropriate degree</p>
<p>And you will naturally reach it [vitality].</p>

<h2>XXI</h2>
<p>As for the life of all human beings:</p>
<p>The heavens bring forth their vital essence,</p>
<p>The earth brings forth their bodies.</p>
<p>These two combine to make a person.</p>
<p>When they are in harmony there is vitality;</p>
<p>When they are not in harmony there is no vitality.</p>
<p>If we examine the Way of harmonizing them,</p>
<p>Its essentials are not visible,</p>
<p>Its signs are not numerous.</p>
<p>Just let a balanced and aligned [breath] fill your chest</p>
<p>And it will swirl and blend within your mind,</p>
<p>This confers longevity.</p>
<p>When joy and anger are not limited,</p>
<p>You should make a plan [to limit them].</p>
<p>Restrict the five sense-desires;</p>
<p>Cast awat these dual misfortunes.</p>
<p>Be not joyous, be not angry,</p>
<p>Just let a balanced and aligned [breathing] fill your chest.</p>

<h2>XXII</h2>
<h4>(Lines 5+ probably later Confucian additions)</h4>
<p>As for the vitality of all human beings:</p>
<p>It inevitably occurs because of balanced and aligned [breathing].</p>
<p>The reason for its loss</p>
<p>Is inevitably pleasure, anger, worry and anxiety.</p>
<p>Therefore, to bring your anger to a halt, there is nothing better than poetry;</p>
<p>To cast off worry there is nothing better than music;</p>
<p>To limit music there is nothing better than the rites;</p>
<p>To hold onto the rites there is nothing better than reverence;</p>
<p>To hold onto reverence there is nothing better than tranquility.</p>
<p>When you are inwardly tranquil and outwardly reverent</p>
<p>You are able to return to your innate nature</p>
<p>And this nature will become greatly stable.</p>

<h2>XXIII</h2>
<p>For all the Way of eating is that:</p>
<p>Overfilling yourself with food will impair your vital energy</p>
<p>And cause your body to deteriorate.</p>
<p>Overrestricting your concumption causes the bones to wither</p>
<p>And the blood to congeal.</p>
<p>The mean between overfilling and overrestricting:</p>
<p>This is called "harmonious completion."</p>
<p>It is where the vital essence lodges</p>
<p>And knowledge is generated.</p>
<p>When hunger and fullness lose their proper balance,</p>
<p>You make a plan to correct this.</p>
<p>When full, move quickly;</p>
<p>When hungry, neglect your thoughts;</p>
<p>When old forget worry.</p>
<p>If when full you don't move quickly,</p>
<p>Vital energy will not circulate to your limbs</p>
<p>If when hungry you don't neglect thoughts of food,</p>
<p>When you finally eat you will not stop.</p>
<p>If when old you don't forget your worries,</p>
<p>The fount of your vital energy will rapidly drain out.</p>

<h2>XXIV</h2>
<p>When you enlarge your mind and let go of it,</p>
<p>When you relax your vital breath and expand it,</p>
<p>When your body is calm and unmoving,</p>
<p>And you can maintain the One and discard the myriad disturbances:</p>
<p>You will see profit and not be enticed by it,</p>
<p>You will see harm and not be firghtened by it.</p>
<p>Relaxed and unwound, yet acutely sensitive,</p>
<p>In solitude you delight in your own person.</p>
<p>This is called "revolving the vital breath":</p>
<p>Your thoughts and deeds seem heavenly</p>

<h2>XXV</h2>
<p>The vitality of all people</p>
<p>Inevitably comes FROM THEIR PEACE OF MIND.</p>
<p>When anxious you lose this guiding thread;</p>
<p>When angry, you lose this basic point.</p>
<p>When you are anxious or sad, pleased or angry,</p>
<p>The Way has no place within you to settle.</p>
<p>Love and desire: still them!</p>
<p>Folly and disturbance: correct them!</p>
<p>Do not push it! do not pull it!</p>
<p>Good fortune will naturally return to you,</p>
<p>And that Way will naturally come to you</p>
<p>So you can rely on and take counsel from it.</p>
<p>If you are tranquil then you will attain it;</p>
<p>If you are agitated then you will lose it.</p>

<h2>XXVI</h2>
<p>That mysterious vital energy within the mind:</p>
<p>One moment it arrives, the next it departs.</p>
<p>So fine, there is nothing within it;</p>
<p>So vast, there is nothing outside it.</p>
<p>We lose it</p>
<p>Because of the harm caused by mental agitation.</p>
<p>When the mind can hold on to tranquility,</p>
<p>They Way will become naturally stabilized.</p>
<p>For people who have attained the Way</p>
<p>It permeates their pore and saturates their hair.</p>
<p>Within their chest, they remain unvanquished.</p>
<p>[Follow] this Way of restricting sense-desires</p>
<p>And the myriad things will not cause you harm.</p>
